docs: usage guide for range fields and skill for writing usage guides (#224)
siemens/ix-docs: docs/components/range-field/guide.md

---
doc-type: 'tab-item'
description: 'Usage guide for the ix-range-field'
formReady: true
---

# Range field - Usage

Range fields work as a wrapper component when two related inputs describe one bounded interval with a clear start and end. They are often used with date, time or date-time inputs, but they also work with other paired inputs e.g. number inputs for defining minimum and maximum allowed values.

![Anatomy range field](https://www.figma.com/design/wEptRgAezDU1z80Cn3eZ0o/iX-Documentation-illustrations?node-id=7795-3782&t=VdWD2lSX0POwEDXH-4)

1. Start field
2. Range separator
3. End field

## Variants

- **Date range:** Use this variant for calendar-based periods such as maintenance windows or reporting periods
- **Time range:** Use this variant for time-only intervals such as shifts or operating windows within a day

> - **Date-time range:** Use this variant when both the day and the time matter, for example for event windows or analysis periods

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Date range:** Use this variant for calendar-based periods, e.g. maintenance windows or reporting periods
- **Time range:** Use this variant for time-only intervals, e.g. shifts or operating windows within a day
- **Date-time range:** Use this variant when both the day and the time matter, e.g. for event windows or analysis periods
```

![Variants range field](https://www.figma.com/design/wEptRgAezDU1z80Cn3eZ0o/iX-Documentation-illustrations?node-id=7796-2797&t=VdWD2lSX0POwEDXH-4)

## Options

> - **Labels:** Label both inputs clearly, e.g. "Start date" and "End date" or "From" and "To". Keep labels short when the surrounding heading already explains the context.

Reviewer: For this labels option and the last option (validation and helper texts) it lists 2 of many available options for inputs which might make it sounds like others cannot be used here, e.g. helper as tooltip. 

Consider one of those options:
1. add a note below the bullet list (e.g. "Note for the individual inputs all available options for date inputs, time inputs, and date time inputs are available" + link those pages)
2. list all available properties with a "see [form field](#)" text if there's no dedicated rule

> - **Paired input type:** Use the same input type in both fields so the range stays predictable. Combine e.g. two date inputs, two time inputs or two date-time inputs.

Reviewer: Is this really an option? It sounds to me like a DO 🤔

---
doc-type: 'tab-item'
description: 'Usage guide for the ix-range-field'
formReady: true
---

> # Range field - Usage

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# Range field - usage
```

Author: This sets the tab name "Usage" in the "Range field" component page, therefore capitalized "U" needed.

> Range fields work as a wrapper component when two related inputs describe one bounded interval with a clear start and end. They are often used with date, time or date-time inputs, but they also work with other paired inputs e.g. number inputs for defining minimum and maximum allowed values.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Range fields work as a wrapper component when two related inputs describe one bounded interval with a clear start and end. They are often used with date, time or date-time inputs, but they also work with other paired inputs, e.g. number inputs for defining minimum and maximum allowed values.
```

![Anatomy range field](https://www.figma.com/design/wEptRgAezDU1z80Cn3eZ0o/iX-Documentation-illustrations?node-id=7795-3782&t=VdWD2lSX0POwEDXH-4)

1. Start field
2. Range separator
3. End field

## Variants

- **Date range:** Use this variant for calendar-based periods, e.g. maintenance windows or reporting periods
- **Time range:** Use this variant for time-only intervals, e.g. shifts or operating windows within a day

> - **Date-time range:** Use this variant when both the day and the time matter, e.g. for event windows or analysis periods

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Date-time range:** Use this variant when both the day and the time are relevant, e.g. for event windows or analysis periods
```

For the individual inputs, all available options of the paired input components stay available. See [date input](../input-date), [time input](../input-time) and [date time picker](../date-time-picker) for component-specific guidance.

## Behavior in context

- **Interaction:** Keep the earlier value first and the later value second so users can move through the range in a predictable order. Validate both fields individually and together. Make it clear when the end value is earlier or smaller than the start value.
- **Overflow:** Give both fields enough width to show the full value format without clipping. If space is limited, shorten surrounding labels before reducing the field width.
- **Text truncation:** Avoid truncating entered values by choosing an appropriate input width.

## States

Range fields rely on the states of the paired inputs. Use the same guidance as [date input](../input-date) and [time input](../input-time), and apply disabled or read-only states consistently to both inputs when the whole range is unavailable.

## Dos and Don’ts

- Do use range fields when start and end values describe one bounded interval

> - Do keep both inputs in the same type, format and level of precision

Reviewer 2: there is an imbalance with the dos and don'ts - this one could maybe go?

Author: re-phrased it as a don't
